Validating this solution
from external data
is best done by using data that wasn't
necessarily used as variables to create
the clusters during
the modeling process.
An example of this could be where you're
segmenting customers in a retail chain.
One of the variables used to
make the cluster solution
could be a demographic related to
the number of children in a household.
You could then externally
validate this segmentation
by checking to see if
the buying behavior for
that segment is evident in the purchase
of toys or children's clothing.
What you might do in this case is
create statistics around the segments.
You could take the total sales
in toys for each customer and
each segment, and
calculate the average or
median spend, and then compare
the segments by those statistics.
If the clustering process makes sense,
the average spend for
a segment representing families with
small children should be much higher.
Many times this can best be communicated
with visualizations around the data
where you have the cluster groups
identified uniquely in the display.
And then you can see if there are
differences in the values you are using
for validation.
Let's take a look at what
this might look like.